[Music]
[Applause]
all right
[Music]
I'm Frank Ling and hi I'm Charles Lee
and you're listening to the grok sign
show that's right it's a weekly look at
the world of science technology and
their effects on our daily lives coming
up on today's program is Professor David
Deutsch talking about the beginning of
infinity so stay tuned for all this plus
the grokatron 5000 and our world famous
question a week coming right up here on
the Crocs sign show
[Music]
thank you
welcome back to the Glocks Science Show
well science is constantly in the search
for explanations about the world around
us but our explanations of the world are
incomplete and the search for better
ones is ongoing what consists of a good
explanation and how do these
explanations evolve well joining us
today to discuss this issue is Professor
David Deutsch Professor Deutsch is a
professor of physics at Oxford
University and a feller of the Royal
Society author of numerous scientific
and popular Works including the fabric
of reality his latest work the beginning
of infinity explanations that transform
the world explores this topic for a
general audience and Professor Deutscher
we're very pleased to have you today on
the grok sign show well thank you for
having me well this is really a pleasure
since this is like your previous book a
fascinating read to the beginning of
infinity which you talk about
explanations is really being kind of the
driver for human existence I'm curious
to tell us how do explanations come
about and how do we decide among
explanations that are good versus those
that don't fit reality an idea of an
explanation being good is my solution to
a a the what you might call the
centuriesel problem of how come things
work how come science works and all
previous methods of trying to understand
things like you know what makes the
stars shine and so on just didn't work
they just didn't make any Headway at all
and the standard answer for that in the
case of science has been that we have
testable theories now and and previously
theories were untestable that so you
couldn't ever tell the difference
between rival theories and so you could
never make progress but I think for
various reasons that's inadequate
because for example many myths are also
testable but they're still not capable
of making progress and my idea is that a
good explanation is one that accounts
for something in reality purports to
account for something in in reality
where it is hard to vary that's the key
thing in other words a slightly
different account would not account for
that thing as well and so that's a good
explanation the nice thing about the
idea of a good explanation is that
within science it explains why
testability is the Criterion for good
science but good explanation applies
Beyond science as well it applies in
philosophy and politics and morality and
Aesthetics and everything and I try to
cover all those things in the book so
where is testability the criteria for
deciding amongst explanations what about
in those fields where testability is not
possible
well there test
special case of hard to vary so for
example if you if you had an idea that
no one's allowed to steal except you and
that's the moral thing then the thing is
that theory is easy to vary because as a
moral explanation it's just as good as
no one's allowed to steal except me or
no one's allowed to steal except you and
me and so on and so countless variations
of that idea we're all with different
exceptions and none of those exceptions
have a better moral explanation than any
of the others whereas the idea that no
one should steal doesn't make an
exception doesn't have to explain the
exception and therefore it's a better
moral explanation I love about the idea
that everyone should steal yes so one of
the nice things about this critical
world view which by the way isn't mine
it's due to the philosopher Karl Popper
originally I just applied it to this
idea of good explanations is that no
Criterion of criticism is excluded a
priori so you can exclude something but
all of them have to contribute to this
good explanation feature so the idea of
that everyone should steal also has this
property that it's hard to vary but it
doesn't account for the thing it's
supposed to account for because if
everyone could steal that would have
obvious practical disadvantages like
running out of things to steal sure
everyone just to shift things around
adding some item but yes if two is
discussed in the book by the way in in a
little Cameo appearance by Daenerys
Socrates who suggests this very idea so
regarding how explanations come about
argue that notion that ideas coming
through experience and rather than from
evidence to Theory uh yes I argue that
that is wrong and that really what
happens is that the validation via being
a good explanation comes first and only
in the rare and fortunate case where we
have more than one good explanation do
we then apply well in the case of
science do we then apply experimental
testing so the overwhelming majority of
theories even testable theories that you
could think of are never tested because
they are bad explanations and the
example I gave in my first book was what
about the theory that eating a kilogram
of grass will cure the common cold well
the thing is that's a perfectly testable
Theory but no one will ever test it
because it is a bad explanation there's
nothing that goes with it that would
distinguish between that and the theory
that 1.1 kilograms of grass will cure
the common cold or 0.9 or whatever and
therefore you could never know when you
had tested it in general by the way I a
it's impossible to test any theory that
doesn't come with an explanation and one
of the things I criticize in the book is
theories in the less hard Sciences shall
we say in Sciences like psychology and
so on where one just makes a hypothesis
about how humans are without an
underlying explanation for why they are
like that and those theories I think
can't truly be tested even though in
their form they may resemble testable
theories so given that some theories are
untested is it possible that there is a
limit to what we can know
I
ayog isn't or rather there are limits
imposed by things like mathematics and
the laws of physics themselves so it's
possible that we shall never be able to
know in the case of physics we shall
never be able to know what Julius Caesar
ate for his last meal before he was
assassinated
but what we shall always be able to do
is solve problems so the issue of what
Julius Caesar at for his last meal will
never be something that keeps anyone
awake at night conversely any of the
things that are capable of keeping a
person awake at night worrying about
them are soluble and they are soluble by
creating knowledge and knowledge is
created by trying to create better
explanations by criticizing and varying
existing explanations so these
explanations allow us then to transform
the world and that's really what gives
humans power over reality in a sense yes
there's a deep connection built into
nature and in the book I try to argue
why this must be so a connection between
understanding the world and controlling
it on the face of it those are two very
different things you know you may
understand why an asteroid is heading
towards the Earth and going to
obliterate us you may you may be able to
work it out down to the last decimal
place but that in itself doesn't enable
you to prevent it but steep connection
says that with enough knowledge
understanding always is connected with
the corresponding control and that's why
science is linked with technology and
that's why the unlimited nature of
science which to deny that is
essentially to believe in the
Supernatural that the unlimited scope of
science leads to an unlimited scope of
technology which means that things which
are problematic to us are always all
going to be soluble with sufficient
technological knowledge such as disease
and death and the ability to travel in
space and so on oftentimes it seems that
technology precedes the explanation such
that something is engineered and then
the reason why it works is discovered
later
this used to be much more true than it
is today and it is becoming ever less
true that as as both Science and
Technology become more sophisticated
it's becoming more and more a case of
working out why something must work and
then building it for a very good example
of this is in the science of medicine
where let's say a hundred years ago the
mode of action of medicines was
basically unknown we were lucky if we
were right about the idea that a
particular medicine does work let but we
certainly didn't know much about how it
works now today it's increasingly
becoming the other way around that is
there's a whole science developing of a
designer pharmacology where we unders
first understand the mechanism of a
disease then we conjecture what kind of
chemical would interrupt the progress of
that disease then redesign the chemical
and only then do we ever try it in other
words after we have the explanation and
the more sophisticated Science and
Technology get the more it is the case
that these rules of thumb type knowledge
which are really
uncreatively generated are being
superseded by creatively generated good
explanations
it's sort of difficult to see how the
general model then fits into the
humanities and economics yes economics
is a difficult case because it is sort
of half science and half philosophy and
in science we must have testable
theories and in philosophy it's a
terrible mistake to require testable
theories and so uh economics has sort of
got itself into a tangle by confusing
the two but a more extreme case that I
and and so I don't actually discuss
economics in the book though I do
discuss political philosophy but there
is the matter of Aesthetics where almost
everybody would say that what is
beautiful or ugly is just a matter of
personal taste and calling it a matter
of taste it has been taken to be
synonymous with saying that there is no
objective truth of the matter but I have
an argument in the book that there must
be an objective to of the matter and the
argument is drawn from the co-evolution
of flowers and insects basically the
notion of Beauty on which or
attractiveness on which flowers and
insects have co-evolved and converged we
can understand from the theory of
evolution why they have evolved the
flowers to generate a particular
patterns to meet a particular Criterion
and insects to use that same Criterion
to decide what flowers to visit it's
easy to understand that via the ordinary
theory of evolution but the mystery then
is why do humans also reliably find that
same thing attractive when we didn't
have that co-evolution and I go through
various possibilities and eventually
conclude that the only reasonable
explanation of this is that the easiest
way to do this signaling between
different species was to Hit Upon an
objective Criterion of beauty and
Implement that and that's why humans
also find flowers beautiful and so it's
the flowers and the insects and the
humans and no one else think you can
only explain this via the theory that
this beauty is objective so that the
Universe actually has a criteria for
what is beautiful exactly strangely the
the idea that so it runs counter to the
prevailing what can I call it the
prevailing rational worldview but I
think that there's no escaping it and
this all ties here it wants to realize
that this is so it it ties together a
lot of things that have been known or
suspected in any case but people haven't
known how to fit them in to the world
view for example we know that Elegance
is an excellent guide to True theories
in science that is the ones before we
test them now has been remarked often
many a beautiful theory has been slain
by an ugly fact but nevertheless
Beauty in series is a much better guide
than just random chance would dictate
and why is that well that's hard to
explain if beauty is is simply a matter
of arbitrary human or cultural taste but
it's easy to explain if beauty is
objective because then it's a matter of
objective truth what is an elegant
Theory and objective truths are all
related to each other just like
scientific truths or art that's a
special case of it determining what what
is the objective truth does not always
seen an easy process Thomas Kuhn pointed
this out to the structure of scientific
revolutions whereas you might think that
if it really is the truth it would just
become intuitively obvious that that it
is the truth yes not Army sometimes are
often but it's always a messy process
and what's more we never achieve the
final truth what we discover is various
truths or ideas that contain truth and
solve problems thereby but the result of
solving a problem is not the absence of
problems it's a new problem and has
seized on this feature as if it was a
bad thing this is part of the campaign
of himself and many 20th century
philosophers to bad mouth very concept
of objective truth even in science let
alone elsewhere but this thing that he
thinks is an indictment of science is
actually the very means by which science
is capable of making infinite progress
because think about it if we could
achieve the final answer in everything
then science would have to come to an
end and progress would be finite
necessarily but the only way that
progress can be infinite as I argue this
is it is if we never reach the final
truth if uh all we ever do is move from
a problem to a better problem
from a theory to a better Theory and so
on searching for explanations to
problems that that arise and the yes and
the the never to expect the answer to be
the final answer for it to solve the
problem as we see it now and the result
is always a better more beautiful more
intriguing more useful set of problems
so philosophically then outside of what
we can know is their final say
ontological truth about nature that yeah
that's the other half of
half of the truth a final objective
truth that as you say ontologically as
it were exists but what we do we don't
have access to final truth what all we
can do is improve so and we can improve
objectively sometimes when we think
we've improved we haven't in fact
improved and just that very concept the
idea that we can think we have improved
but haven't in fact improved you can't
even realize that properly you can't
grok that properly if I may say so
without realizing that there is an
objective truth that is independent of
what anyone may think so the final grok
is is unattainable that's right
well that's one of the Intriguing
aspects of the book is that you argue
that the Earth might be fundamentally
unsustainable yes it's
the 99
of all species that have ever existed
have been wiped out by the very earth on
which they evolved so and all of our
sister species uh were wiped out by the
same environment that they grew up in
and the the the Great Rift Valley in
Africa where our species evolved could
hardly support any people by present-day
standards and those that it did support
it supported only in tremendous misery
like it does with nearly all species
nature is not only red in tooth and Claw
it's cruel it's full of starvation and
slavery and sickness and conflict and so
on it's only humans that can improve
things
and that's what we do but improving them
only gives us ever a temporary respite
from
this normal State of Affairs in nature
of being cruel and involving suffering
so what we do is we improve things we
reach a new level of problems thereby we
improve those and we reach a new level
of problems there if that couldn't go on
forever then we'd be headed for a brick
wall and we would go extinct like all of
our predecessor species but if it's
unlimited which I argue it is then we
can keep surviving and making our lives
better but only by a continual exercise
of creativity and so then the unlimited
Source then might be the Stars which we
then expand into the universe yes we're
going to have to coming the consensus
nowadays we're going to have to leave
put out not leave all our eggs in one
basket and colonize first other planets
and then other star systems and thereby
across the Galaxy but we will also be
exploring
downwards into nanotechnology and deeper
and deeper understanding of atoms and
physical processes at a at the
fundamental level and in fact the two
will go together as they always have
question is whether the the
distinctively human way of existing
namely to improve things and thereby
change them and thereby encounter new
problems and have things get better
whether that is inherently finite or
whether it's unlimited and if it's
inherently finite then we are doomed no
matter what we do but if it's unlimited
which I argue that it is then we may not
be doomed in that case whether we are
doomed or not depends on what decisions
we make whether we make decisions in the
rational way of trying to find better
explanations or whether we try
irrational ways of for example seeking
stasis such as sustainability which I
think is is a very poor aim for a
guiding principle for human decisions
well here's to unlimited progress then
um yeah I I couldn't agree more
uh well the new book then is the
beginning of infinity explanations that
transform the world and Professor
Deutsche I want to thank you very much
for joining us today on the grockside
show Phil thank you for having me it's
very interesting all right well it was
our pleasure and um if you have a few
minutes we would quickly like to play
our game the grokatron 5000. okay
all right it's time to play the game the
grokatron 5000 it is our supercomputer
formerly known as deep blue and today
the grokatron 5000 has chosen the topic
do they have a good explanation for the
world so for the following five
individuals the grokatron 5000 like to
know if think they hold a good
explanation for the world or not and
maybe a little reason why Professor
Deutsch ready to play the game certainly
okay here we go person number one does
he have a good explanation it's a
variety show host Simon Cowell I haven't
had Simon Cowell give any explanation of
anything so I'd have to say no okay all
right well number two it's the soccer
great David Beckham uh now he definitely
has good explanations but they might be
inexplicit that is they may not be
expressed in words what a great
Sportsman has is knowledge that is not
necessarily expressible in words if it
were then they could pass it on much
more easily to other people it may be
only partially expressed in words and I
I think but on the other hand if
somebody is consistently better at
something than other people this is due
to knowledge
and so I would have to say yes for David
Beckham but almost certainly it's
inexplicit knowledge all right number
three it's Richard Branson anyone who's
a self-made billionaire knows stuff I
think and it might be again inexplicit
or it might be explicit I think that
Richard Branson certainly has a large
amount of inexplicit knowledge about how
to run organizations and also about how
to tune products to the market I have
actually heard explicit theories from
him so I can't judge his explicit
theories I'm afraid and again if
somebody does anything a lot better than
other people who are trying to do it
it's because they know something and
that has got to be at the explanations
at some level
uh I'm curious about number four then
it's Sharon Osbourne the wife of Ozzy
Osbourne
um I haven't seen her in action okay
um well okay finally number five then
it's the uh your Prime Minister David
Cameron uh the jury's out there Cameron
occasionally says things that clearly
are explanatory theories and they have
got him to the top first of his party
and now of the country so he's obviously
got some kind of knowledge to that
extent but I think with the Prime
Minister one has to ask primarily about
their explicit knowledge whether the
assertions they make in their speeches
are good explanations or not and I have
certainly seen some that are but again
with the Prime Minister one can't tell
whether he wrote them so what one has to
do with the prime minister is wait and
see what the outcome is only a prime
minister with good explanations can
achieve success for the country
so we'll wait and see
all right well Professor Deutsch I want
to thank you very much for sticking
around playing our game and again
talking about your book which is again
called the beginning of affinity uh
explanations that transform the world
thank you so much for your time thank
you
and that's all for this week's edition
of the grock sign show make sure you
tune in next week for more from the
world of science and technology if you'd
like to contact us here you can email us
at science at grox.net for Brock science
I'm Frank Ling and I'm Charles Lee make
sure you also see us on the web at
www.rocks.net have a great afternoon and
keep on rocking foreign
[Music]
foreign
thank you